---
title: Common Language Runtime
date: 2017-08-19
image: ./clr.jpg
imageAuthor: [
	'Battlecreek Coffee Roasters',
	'https://unsplash.com/@battlecreekcoffeeroasters?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText'
]
imageProvider: [
	'Unsplash',
	'https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText'
]
tags:
- in depth
resources: [
	['https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Language_Runtime', 'Wikipedia - CLR'],
	['https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gfkTfcpWqAY', 'Programming with Mosh'],
	['https://unsplash.com/search/photos/language?photo=yiptq3TFiX8', 'Photo by Erik Eastman on Unsplash'],
]
published: true
---

The **Common Language Runtime (CLR)** is basically an application that manages
the execution of .NET programs.<br /> It's made by Microsoft as a solution of
following problems that existed in the software development world in early
days.<br />

One of the biggest problems that CLR solved was that when a code was compiled it
could only run on the same platform. For example, let's say developer wrote
C/C++ app and compiles it. The compiler translates that code to Native Code of
the machine on which it was running. That means compiled code can run only on
the machine with the same architecture. You can only imagine that this kind of
limitation can't exist in today's world - we have already on the home machines
with different CPU's and operating systems.

Back in a days when Microsoft was designing C#, they took inspiration from Java
world. In Java, when the code is compiled, it's not compiled into **Native
Code** - instead, it's compiled to **Bytecode**.<br /> Microsoft applied same
logic on C#.

<Modal>

<img
  src="https://i.imgur.com/1vMo2gR.png"
  alt="Common Language Runtime scheme"
  className="my-1"
/>

</Modal>

Now when C# code is compiled it's actually translated to CIL code (Common
Intermediate Language). This way, it's independent of the machine on which it's
compiled.<br /> Problem is, that CPU doesn't understand this code and some
so-called translator is required. This is the place, where CLR comes in and
translates CIL to Native Code. This process is called **Just-in-time Compilation
(JIT)**. Whenever code is compiled via this technique, it can run on the machine
with the different architecture (as long as machine have CLR).

<br />
<br />

### Other benefits this runtime provides:

- Ability to use components that have coded in other languages.

- Language features - inheritance, interfaces, overloading and so on.

- Support for threads, structured exception handling, and custom attributes.

- Garbage collection.

- Delegates.
